Title: Date of publication xxxx 00, 0000, date of current version xxxx 00, 0000

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11957v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Jul 2026 00:04:11 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
VOLUME XX, XXXX 1

# Anomalous Frame Detection Using VLM -Based 

# Description Comparison for Extracting Expert -

# Specific Actions and Contextual Decision -Making 

# Scenes with Intra -Video Self -Similarity 

Ryo Sakai 1 and  Kaname Yokoyama 1        

> 1Robotics Research Department, Research and Development Group ,Hitachi, Ltd. ,Ibaraki ,Japan
> Corresponding author: Ryo Sakai (e -mail: ryo.sakai.cx @hitachi.com ).

ABSTRACT  Maintenance of critical infrastructures, such as railways and power plants, is essential for 

ensuring operational safety and reliability. However, the declining number of skilled maintenance workers 

highlights the need to transfer expert know -how to less e xperienced workers. Previous studies have attempted 

to extract candidates of expert knowledge by comparing videos of manual -based work with those of expert 

workers, mainly focusing on differences in observable actions. However, expert know -how is often emb edded 

not only in actions but also in contextual decision -making during task execution. This paper proposes a 

method that detects anomalous frames between two task videos to automatically extract candidate scenes 

containing expert -specific actions and cont extual decision -making scenes. The method generates frame -wise 

visual descriptions using a vision language model (VLM). Expert -specific actions are extracted based on 

frame similarities computed from description comparisons between two videos, while contextual decision -

making scenes are extracted using segment similarities derived from intra -video self -similarity of the 

descriptions. In simulated distribution board maintenance experiments involving 27 task scenarios, the 

proposed method achieved extraction rates of 65% for action candidates and 61% for decision -scene 

candidates, improving over conventio nal methods that achieved 59% and 33%, respectively. These results 

demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach in discovering candidate scenes containing expert 

know -how. 

INDEX TERMS  Anomalous frame detection, video similarity analysis, vision –language models, expert 

actions, expert contextual decision -making, maintenance skill transfer 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Maintenance work is one of the critical tasks in the 

operation of infrastructure facilities such as railways and 

power plants. On the other hand, there is a shortage of 

skilled maintenance personnel with sufficient technical 

skills at each site  [1, 2, 3] . One potential solution to this 

shortage is the training of new maintenance inspectors. For 

new inspectors to acquire know -how equivalent to that of 

experts, it takes time to re -experience the work performed 

by those experts. For example, cases have been r eported 

where expert know -how in ship operations is used for the 

early training of personnel  [4] . However, as expert know -

* This work was carried out as part of an internship by Kaname Yokoyama ; he is currently with Graduate school of Engineering, Toyota Technological 

Institute .

how is often tacit, its codification is essential for systematic 

education and efficiently expanding the pool of inspectors 

s [5] . Therefore, there is a growing need to extract work 

know -how from experts, codify it as explicit knowledge, 

and pass it on to new maintenance personnel. 

One method for codifying the work know -how of skilled 

maintenance workers (hereinafter referred to as "experts") is 

the interview technique  [4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11] . However, it is 

difficult to obtain information regarding know -how that the 

interviewer cannot anticipate in advance or that the expert 

themselves is unaware of. Furthermore, work know -how 

that is second nature to the expert or that they do not VOLUME XX, XXXX 7

perceive as important may not be uncovered. Since such 

know -how may actually underpin the quality of the work, 

it is desirable to codify it, including this unconscious know -

how. 

To codify know -how that even experts are unaware of,  the 

conventional method extract s differences as action 

candidates that may contain know -how by generating and 

comparing image descriptions for each video —one created 

based on a manual (hereinafter referred to as a "manual -

based work video") and the other recording the expert’s 

work (here inafter referred to as an "expert's work video") 

[12] . This technology has demonstrated that actions added 

by experts or skipped relative to the manual can be detected 

as differences in behavior corresponding to "what to do" in 

work procedures. 

In addition to such "what to do" actions, expert know -how 

can also include contextual decision -making, such as 

"where and which item to operate," even when performing 

the same task. For example, consider a case where a 

manual -based work video records a bre aker -off task for a 

certain distribution board during maintenance, and an 

expert's work video records the same task for a different 

distribution board. In this case, the task is the same breaker -

off operation, so no difference in action occurs. However, 

th e decision regarding which distribution board to operate 

may reflect the expert's advanced know -how concerning 

system configuration, load status, safety, and other factors. 

In this way, even if the action is the same, differences in 

the work  scenes  such as the target or location —may contain 

decision -related know -how. Therefore, it is important to 

extract decision -making scenes that may contain such 

know -how. However, since the conventional method  [12] 

generates descriptions independently for each image in 

each video, the focus of description generation may not 

align between videos, and different descriptions may be 

generated for individual frames even for the same task. 

Consequently, differences in des criptions may not 

necessarily reflect differences in decision -making scenes, 

but may arise from differences in visual focus, making it 

difficult to extract appropriate decision -making scenes. 

A simple way to realize the extraction of decision -making 

scenes while suppressing the influence of attention shifts in 

the  conventional  method  [12]  is to input all image pairs 

from each video into an image description generator, 

directly compare the images, and output descriptions of 

whether the scenes are different to extract candidates. With 

this method, the image description generator can determin e

if a scene is a decision -making one while referring to both 

images and aligning the focus between them. However, in 

this approach, descriptions for image pairs that are 

temporally close are expected to be similar.  Yet  the 

generator may produce different  descriptions depending on 

minute differences between images transitioning over time, 

potentially leading to lower extraction accuracy based on 

incorrect descriptions. Furthermore, direct comparison 

between images increases the computational complexity on 

the order of the square of the number of images, thereby 

increasing calculation time. 

Therefore, this study proposes a method that  uniformly 

realizes the extraction of action candidates and decision -

making scene candidates within a single framework. 

Specifically, action candidates are obtained through a

filtering process using a cross -video  frame  similarity map 

created from image descriptions generated from each frame. 

For decision -making scene extraction, each video is first 

segmented into semantically stable intervals using a self -

similarity map, and different scenes are then extracted by 

comparing image pairs within these segments. A key 

feature of the proposed method is that it realizes the 

extraction of both action and decision -making scene 

candidates in a unified manner and expands the comparison 

unit for decision -making scene extractio n from an image -

wise to a segment -wise basis. This approach suppresses the 

reduction in extraction accuracy caused by description 

instability and mitigates the impact of increased 

computational complexity. 

In experiments involving 27 task scenarios of simulated 

distribution board maintenance, the proposed method 

achieved extraction rates of 65.0% for action candidates 

and 61.0% for decision -scene candidates. These results 

mark a significant improvement over  the conventional 

method, which achieved 59.0% and 33.0% for action and 

decision -scene candidates, respectively. These findings 

demonstrate that the proposed method can effectively 

support the codification of expert know -how by improving 

extraction accuracy  while maintaining computational 

efficiency comparable to existing approaches. 

The main contributions of this paper are summarized as 

follows: 

i.  A method for automatically extracting candidate 

expert -specific actions and contextual decision -

making scenes from task videos.  We formulate the 

problem of identifying candidate expert actions and 

contextual decision -making scenes by detecting 

anomalous frames between manual -based work 

videos and expert worker videos , all without the 

need for  additional  training. 

ii.  A unified framework that integrates frame -level and 

segment -level video comparisons based on VLM -

generated descriptions.  Expert -specific actions are 

extracted using frame similarities computed from 

VLM -based description comparisons between two 

videos, while contextual decision -making scenes are 

extracted using segment similarities derived from 

intra -video self -similarity ana lysis. 

iii.  Experimental validation on simulated distribution 

board maintenance tasks.  Experiments on 27 

simulated maintenance scenarios demonstrate that 

the proposed method achieves extraction rates of 

65% for action candidates and 61% for decision -VOLUME XX, XXXX 7

scene candidates, outperforming conventional 

methods (59% and 33%). 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 

Section  II  reviews related work on video difference 

detection. Section  III  details  problem definition.  Section I V

details the proposed method, including similarity map 

generation and video segmentation.  Section  V and  VI 

explain  the experimental design and results . Finally, 

Section  VII  presents the conclusion of this study . 

> II. RELATED WORK

Various methods have been proposed to compare two 

videos and extract their differences. For example, some 

approaches compute similarities between two videos to 

construct a similarity map and detect anomalous frames 

based on this map  [13, 14, 15, 16] . These methods generally 

consist of two main steps: (1) constructing a similarity map 

and (2) detecting differences using the similarity map. By 

employing deep learning –based techniques, they can 

robustly detect  crucial differences  even in the presence of 

noise that should not be the focus, such as variations in 

camera angles and lighting conditions. 

In addition, studies have been proposed that utilize large 

language models (LLMs) and vision –language models 

(VLMs) to extract task -related differences between two 

videos  [17] . In these approaches, the level of abstraction of 

the differences to be detected can be specified as a text query, 

enabling flexible adjustment of the detection process. These 

methods directly detect differences by taking two videos as 

input. 

However, many of these methods require large amounts of 

video data and training based on the collected data. Although 

the cost of data collection can be reduced in domains where 

data are readily available on the web, in domains such as 

maintenance and insp ection, where data are generally not 

publicly available, the cost of data collection and training 

becomes high. Therefore, for practical applications, it is 

important to detect differences with as low cost as possible. 

To address this issue, this paper proposes a difference 

detection method that utilizes similarity maps constructed 

from descriptions generated by pre -trained VLMs and 

captioning models, aiming to minimize the cost of 

deployment in real environments. 

Related to this study, there has been growing research on 

video understanding and video comparison using VLMs. 

Recent studies have explored the use of pre -trained VLMs 

for video understanding tasks  [18] . For example, 

ActionCLIP  [19]  reformulates action recognition as a

matching problem between videos and text and achieves 

zero -shot transfer through prompt -based fine -tuning. 

VideoLLM  [20]  employs a decoder -only LLM to perform 

unified inference across multiple video tasks. These studies 

demonstrate the potential of leveraging pre -trained models to 

understand video content with minimal additional training. 

Furthermore, VideoDiff  [21]  has been proposed as a

method for detecting differences between two videos without 

additional training. VideoDiff uses multiple pre -trained 

models to generate natural language descriptions of 

differences between two input videos, optionally guided by 

text ual descriptions of the video content. However, while 

VideoDiff handles temporal information regarding when 

differences occur, it does not explicitly identify difference 

segments. Moreover, it focuses on differences in actions, 

such as variations in form o r skill within the same  action and 

does not address differences in work scenes arising from 

contextual decision -making. 

In our previous work  [12] , we proposed a difference 

detection method based on similarity maps constructed from 

VLM -based captioning texts between two videos. This 

method was shown to be effective in extracting anomalous 

frames related to expert action knowledge. However, since 

the  method is based on frame -level difference detection, it is 

difficult to capture differences in entire work scenes arising 

from contextual decision -making. This study extends this 

framework to handle both action -level and scene -level 

differences in a unifi ed manner. 

Another related research area is scene change detection, 

which aims to detect differences in scenes between two 

videos. Scene change detection compares a reference video 

and a target video to identify visual changes such as object 

appearance/disappearance  and background structural 

changes. Padilla et al.  [22]  proposed a method that 

synchronizes two videos temporally and computes feature 

differences to detect newly appearing objects. Recently, 

training -free methods have also been proposed. Cho et al. 

[23]  detect changes by combining object detection results 

from a pre -trained model with tracking -based identity 

management. Kim et al.  [24]  proposed a change detection 

method based on pseudo -mask generation using internal 

features of pre -trained models and two -stage matching using 

geometric and semantic information. 

These methods  [22, 23, 24]  mainly focus on detecting local 

visual changes such as object appearance and disappearance. 

In contrast, the anomalous decision -scene detection targeted 

in this study aims to extract segments in which the overall 

work scene differs between a manual -based v ideo and an 

expert video, due to differences in expert decision -making, 

such as changes in operation targets, inspection targets, 

movement destinations, or gaze points. The differences 

considered in this study may include local changes such as 

object appea rance/disappearance but are not limited to them. 

Rather, the key objective is to detect task -semantic scene 

differences that reflect differences in decision -making within 

the work context, rather than pixel -level or object -level 

differences. Furthermore, while existing  scenes  change 

detection methods typically output change masks or regions, 

our method outputs video segments containing anomalous 

candidates. In addition, these methods VOLUME XX, XXXX 7    

> FIGURE 1. Conceptual flow diagram illustrating the process of extracting candidate actions and candidate scenes containing expert know -how from
> both the manual -based work video 𝑽 𝑴 and the expert’s work video 𝑽 𝑬 .

do not address action anomalies and decision -scene 

anomalies within a unified framework. 

Therefore, this paper proposes a method that directly 

compares a manual video and an expert video to extract both 

candidate action anomalies and candidate decision -scene 

anomalies in a unified and training -free manner, contributing 

to the extraction of exp ert know -how. 

III.  PROBLEM DEFINITION 

The objective of this study is to automatically extract 

candidate actions or candidate decision scenes that may 

contain expert know -how from a manual video and an expert 

video. Here, a  decision scene  refers to a work scene that may 

contain know -how related to the expert’s judgment, for 

example, a scene in which, even for the same power 

distribution panel shutdown task, the expert selects which 

panel to shut down based on the on -site situation and thei r

own experience. Figure 1 shows a conceptual diagram of  the 

flow for extracting candidate actions or candidate decision 

scenes that may contain expert know -how from the above 

two videos. 

Let the manual video be denoted by  𝑉 𝑀  = {𝐼 𝑀  𝑖  | 1 ≤ 𝑖  ≤

𝑁 𝑀 }, and the expert video by  𝑉 𝐸  = {𝐼 𝐸  𝑗  | 1 ≤ 𝑗  ≤ 𝑁 𝐸  }. Here ,

𝐼 𝑀  𝑖  is the image of the  𝑖 -th frame constituting  𝑉 𝑀  , and  𝐼 𝑗  

> 𝐸

is 

the image of the  𝑗 -th frame constituting  𝑉 𝐸  . Both  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸 

are first -person -view videos captured from the worker’s 

perspective. 

In this study, to extract candidate actions or candidate 

decision scenes that contain expert know -how, we propose a 

method that takes  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  as input and detects the start 

frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  of the interval in which such 

candidates appear. After detecting the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end 

frame  𝐹 𝑒 , candidate actions or candidate decision scenes that 

may contain expert know -how can be extracted by retrieving 

the images between these frames (the frames enclosed by the 

red dashed line in Figure 1; hereafter referred to as 

anomalous frames ). The remaining images (the frames 

enclosed by the blue solid line in Figure 1; hereafter referred 

to as  normal frames ) are considered to correspond to work 

performed by the expert in accordance with the manual, and 

are therefore treated as not containing expert know -how. 

Figure 2 shows examples of  𝑉 𝑀  , 𝑉 𝐸  , and the target start 

frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  to be detected. Figure 2(a) 

assumes, as a task example, shutting off the power of a 

distribution panel breaker after work, and illustrates the case 

where  𝑉 𝐸  contains (A) an action additionally performed 

because the expert deemed it necessary.  𝑉 𝑀  is a work video 

created based on the manual for the task, in which the worker 

performs the breaker shutdown described in the manual. The 

additional action in  𝑉 𝐸  is the action of checking the outlet 

box connected to the distribution panel before shutting off 

the breaker power. These frames belong to the anomalous 

frames in  𝑉 𝐸  (the red dashed frames in Figure 2(a)). In such 

a case where an additional action exists, the goal is to detect 

the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  for the anomalous frame 

interval in  𝑉 𝐸  .

Figure 2(b) assumes, as a task example, a patrol inspection 

of the work room conducted before shutting off the power of 

a distribution panel  breaker and  illustrates the case where (B) 

an action present in the manual is not performed in  𝑉 𝐸  .

Compared with  𝑉 𝑀  , the expert in  𝑉 𝐸  skips the action of 

confirming that the door is closed. This action belongs to the 

anomalous frames in  𝑉 𝑀  (the red dashed frames in Figure 

2(b)). In such a case where an action is skipped, the goal is 

to detect the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  within the 

anomalous frames of  𝑉 𝑀 .8 VOLUME XX, XXXX         

> FIGURE 2. Examples of the manual -based work video (𝑽 𝑴 ), the expert’s work video (𝑽 𝑬 )and the start frame ( 𝑭 𝒔 ) and end frames ( 𝑭 𝒆 ) to be detected. (a)
> An example of anomalous frame detection (including additional action). (b) An example of anomalous frame detection (with skipping action). (c) An
> example of anomalous frame detection (including scene difference).

Figure 2(c) assumes the same breaker shutdown task as in 

Figure  2(a) and  illustrates the case where  𝑉 𝐸  contains (C) a 

work scene involving a different distribution panel from that 

in  𝑉 𝑀 , based on the expert’s situational judgment. From the 

viewpoint of task content,  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  involve the same task, 

and thus no action difference arises. On the other hand, from 

the viewpoint of the work scene , 𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  differ, an d

therefore the corresponding frames belong to the anomalous 

frames in  𝑉 𝐸  (the red dashed frames in Figure 2(c)). In such 

a case where there exists an interval in which the work scene 

differs, the goal is to detect the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame 

𝐹 𝑒  for the anomalous frame interval in  𝑉 𝐸  .

In Figure 2(c), the entire video corresponds to a different 

work scene; however, there are also cases where only part of 

the video corresponds to a different scene. For example, the 

outlet box confirmation in Figure 2(a) can be interpreted as 

an action res ulting from the expert’s situational judgment 

regarding the work scene. Even in such a case where only 

part of the video corresponds to a different work scene, the 

goal is  similar  to detect the start frame  𝐹 𝑠 and end frame  𝐹 𝑒 

for the anomalous frame interval in  𝑉 𝐸  .

IV.  PROPOSED METHOD 

A.  Overview 

Figure 3 shows an overview of the proposed method for 

detecting the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  of intervals 

containing candidate actions and decision scenes that may 

include expert know -how, from a manual video  𝑉 𝑀  and an 

expert video  𝑉 𝐸  . The proposed method detects the start frame 

𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  by comparing  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  and 

determining whether there exists a portion depicting an 

action that appears only in one of the videos (hereafter 

referred to as an  anomalous action ). It also detects the start 

frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  by comparing  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  and 

determining whether there exists a portion depicting a scene 

that appears only in one of the videos (hereafter referred to 

as an  anomalous scene ). To realize this detection scheme, the 

proposed method performs anomalous -action detection in 

two steps and anomalous -scene detection also in two steps. 

In the first step of anomalous -action detection, a similarity 

map is generated whose elements are the similarities 

between pairs of images constituting  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  , respectively 

(the green block in Figure 3). To compute the similarity 

between images, the method uses a vision -language model 

(VLM) and a captioning instruction prompt to generate a 

description for each  image and  then computes the similarity 

between the generated descriptions. The captioning 

instruction prompt specifies that the purpose of the VLM is 

to caption the action -related content in the video. In this 

similarity map, when similar actions are performed in t he 

two videos, regions with high similarity are expected to 

appear. On the other hand, when an anomalous action exists 

only in one of the videos, regions with low similarity to all 

images in the other video are expected to appear. 

Therefore, in the second step of anomalous -action 

detection, the method identifies regions with low similarity 

in the similarity map and detects portions depicting actions 

that exist only in one of the videos (the blue block in Figure 

3). Specifically, fil tering is applied to the similarity map to 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX              

> FIGURE 3. Conceptual flowchart of the proposed method .
> FIGURE 4. Workflow for creating similarity maps between videos 𝑽 𝑴 and 𝑽 𝑬 . For each frame of the videos, the proposed method generates image
> captions 𝑪 𝑴 and 𝑪 𝑬 using a VLM 𝑴 𝐜𝐚𝐩 . To improve the quality of the generated descriptions, the method vectorizes images and captions, compares their
> similarities to select the closest caption, and uses it as the cleaned caption. Then, the method vectorizes the cleaned capti ons 𝑪 ̃𝑴 and 𝑪 ̃𝑬 using a text
> encoder 𝝓 𝑻 , calculates the similarity between each pair of vectors 𝐕𝐞𝐜 𝑴 and 𝐕𝐞𝐜 𝑬 , and creates a frame similarity map 𝑺 𝐟𝐦𝐚𝐩 whose elements are the
> calculated similarities.

determine whether the similarity satisfies a certain condition, 

and the beginning and end of the frames satisfying the 

condition are detected as the start frame  𝐹 𝑠 and end frame  𝐹 𝑒 ,

respectively. 

In the first step of anomalous -scene detection, each of  𝑉 𝑀 

and  𝑉 𝐸  is first segmented into video segments, and a

similarity map is then created whose elements are the 

similarities between pairs of segments (the orange block in 

Figure 3). In video segmentation, the similarities between the 

descriptions of images within eac h video, which were 

generated in the first step of anomalous -action detection, are 

computed to construct a self -similarity map for each 

individual video. In this self -similarity map, regions with 

high similarity are expected to appear for similar frames 

wh ose descriptions are alike, whereas regions with low 

similarity are expected to appear for dissimilar frames. Since 

neighboring frames in a work video are generally expected 

to be similar, segmenting the video according to diagonal 

blocks in the self -simil arity map makes it possible to divide 

the video into groups of frames with semantically similar 

descriptions. Because these segments can be interpreted as 

portions of the video separated at a certain semantic 

granularity, comparing segments between  𝑉 𝑀 and  𝑉 𝐸  enables 

comparison between the videos at an appropriate level of 

granularity. 

Accordingly, in the second step of anomalous -scene 

detection, the similarities between the segments of  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝑉 𝐸  created in the first step are computed to construct a 

segment -level similarity map, and processing similar to that 

in the second step of anomalous -action detection is 

performed (the blue block in Figure 3). In this study, the 

beginning and end of the frame s satisfying a specific 

condition for being regarded as an anomalous scene are 

detected as the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒 , respectively. 

Section  IV -B explains how to generate the similarity map 

between images in  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  . Next, Section  IV -C explains 

the filtering method for detecting anomalous frames from the 

similarity map. Section  IV -D describes  the video 

segmentation method based on the self -similarity map 

constructed from the image descriptions in Section  IV -B.

Finally, Section  IV -E explains how to create a similarity map 

between video segments. 

B.  Generation of a Similarity Map Between Videos 

Figure 4 illustrates the procedure for constructing a

similarity map between  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  . First, captions are 

generated for the images, and the captions are vectorized 

using a text encoder. Then, a similarity map is constructed 

by computing similarities between the vectors corresponding 

to the images. Although it is also possible to vectorize 

images directly using an image encoder, such an approach is 

expected to be strongly affected by changes in images that 

are not directly related to the task, such as differences in 

camera angle or lighting conditions. Therefore, to achieve 

robustness to su ch variations and to vectorize task -relevant 

content in the images, the proposed method performs 

captioning for each image and generates vectors representing 

the captions. 

Since the processing for extracting candidate actions is 

described in detail in the previous method  [12] , only the 

outline and the main improvements are explained here. First, 

captions corresponding to the frames constituting a video are 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

generated using a caption -capable VLM  (𝑀 cap ) according to 

Eq. ( 1): 

𝐶  = {𝑐 𝑖  = 𝑀 𝑐𝑎𝑝 (𝐼 𝑖 , 𝑃 𝑐𝑎𝑝 )| 0 ≤ 𝑖  ≤ 𝑁 } (1)

Here,  𝑁  is the number of frames constituting the video, and 

𝑐 𝑖  is the caption corresponding to the  𝑖 -th frame.  𝑃 cap  is a 

captioning instruction prompt, and is an improvement newly 

introduced in this study over the previous method  [12]  to 

improve the accuracy of similarity -map generation by 

controlling the content of the captions.  𝐶  denotes the set of 

captions  𝑐 𝑖 , i.e., the captions for all images constituting the 

video. This caption generation is performed for the frames of 

both  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  , producing the caption sets  𝐶 𝑀  for  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝐶 𝐸  for  𝑉 𝐸  . The same captioning model is used for both  𝑉 𝑀 

and  𝑉 𝐸  .

Next, low -quality captions for a given image are corrected 

by replacing them with a more appropriate caption selected 

from among the captions assigned to other images, thereby 

generating a corrected caption set  𝐶 ̃ . The outline of the 

construction of  𝐶 ̃ is given by Eq. ( 2): 

𝑐 𝑖 ̃ = arg  max  

> 𝑐 ∈𝐶

⟨𝜀 𝐼 (𝐼 𝑖  ), 𝜀 𝑇 (𝑐 )⟩ (2)

Here,  𝜀 𝐼  and  𝜀 𝑇  are the image encoder and text encoder, 

respectively, jointly trained in an image -text foundation 

model, and the latent vectors  𝜀 𝐼 (𝐼 𝑖  ) and  𝜀 𝑇 (𝑐 ) output by 

these encoders can be treated as vectors in the same space. 

Therefore, by computing the latent vector  𝜀 𝐼 (𝐼 𝑖  ) of image  𝐼 𝑖 

and comparing it with the latent vectors  𝜀 𝑇 (𝑐 ) of all captions 

𝑐  ∈ 𝐶 , the caption most similar to the image is regarded as 

the corrected caption  𝑐 ̃𝑖  , thereby correcting low -quality 

captions. In Eq. ( 2),  ⟨⋅,⋅⟩ denotes the similarity measure, for 

which cosine similarity is used. By constructing  𝑐 ̃𝑖  for each 

image, the corrected caption sets  𝐶 ̃𝑀  and  𝐶 ̃𝐸  are obtained. 

Next, the corrected caption sets  𝐶 ̃𝑀  and  𝐶 ̃𝐸  are converted 

into sets of latent vectors, denoted by  Vec 𝑀  and  Vec 𝐸  , using 

the text encoder  𝜙 𝑇  . Cosine similarity is then computed 

between every pair of latent vectors, and a frame -level 

similarity map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  is constructed whose elements are 

these similarities.  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  is an  𝑁 𝑀  × 𝑁 𝐸  matrix, and the 

element in the  𝑖 -th row and  𝑗 -th column of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  represents 

the similarity between the  𝑖 -th frame image  𝐼 𝑖  

> 𝑀

of  𝑉 𝑀  and the 

𝑗 -th frame image  𝐼 𝑗  

> 𝐸

of  𝑉 𝐸  .

C.  Filtering of Anomalous Frames Based on the 

Similarity Map 

In the similarity map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  created in Section  IV -B, the 

similarities of images corresponding to (A) actions 

additionally performed in  𝑉 𝐸  because the expert 

independently judged them necessary, and (B) actions 

present in the manual but not performed in  𝑉 𝐸  , are relatively 

smaller than those of other images. Exploiting this property, 

the proposed method computes the average maximum 

similarity in  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  , and detects the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end 

frame  𝐹 𝑒  by comparing the maximum similarity in each 

column or each row with this average maximum similarity. 

Algorithm 1 shows the filtering procedure for anomalous -

frame detection based on the similarity map. In Algorithm 1, 

the case where anomalous frames exist in  𝑉 𝐸  , i.e., the case 

where  𝑉 𝐸  contains (A) an action additionally performed 

because the expert judged it necessary, is assumed for 

explanation. 

First, the average maximum similarity  𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒  of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 

is computed by Eq. ( 3). Each column of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  corresponds 

to a frame in  𝑉 𝐸  , and each element of the similarity vector 

𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘  in the  𝑘 -th column indicates how similar the  𝑘 -th 

image  𝐼 𝑘  

> 𝐸

in  𝑉 𝐸  is to each image in  𝑉 𝑀  . If the expert is 

performing work in accordance with the manual, then an 

image corresponding to  𝐼 𝑘  

> 𝐸

should exist among the images 

constituting  𝑉 𝑀 , and therefore one of the similarity values  in 

𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘  should  be high; ideally, if the same image exists, that 

similarity should become the maximum value in  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘 

Based on this observation, the proposed method adopts the 

mean of the maximum values of the column -wise similarity 

vectors in  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  as a criterion for judging whether  𝐼 𝑘  

> 𝐸

is an 

anomalous frame, and defines it as the average maximum 

similarity  𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒 :

𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒  = ∑ max (𝑆 𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘  )

> 𝑁 𝐸
> 𝑙 =0

𝑁 𝐸 

(3)

Next, Eq. ( 4 ) is used to determine whether  𝐼 𝑘  

> 𝐸

is an 

anomalous frame. The threshold  𝜏  is a coefficient multiplied 

by  𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒  , and controls how sensitively the proposed 

method reacts to differences between the two videos, where 

𝜏  > 0. The larger  𝜏  is, the more likely the method is to regard 

even a slight decrease in similarity as an anomalous frame 

and extract it as a candidate action containing expert know -

how. If the maximum similarity of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘  is less than or 

equal to the value obtained by multiplying the average 

maximum similarity  MaxAve  by the threshold, then  𝐼 𝑘  

> 𝐸

is 

regarded as an anomalous frame and recorded in the 

anomalous frame set  𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠 :

max (𝑆 𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘 ) ≤ 𝜏  ∙ 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒  (4)

After this judgment is performed for all columns of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,

the first frame in  𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  , obtained by the function 

GetFirstValue (𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  ), is regarded as the start frame  𝐹 𝑠 .

Similarly, the last frame in  𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  , obtained by the 

function  GetEndValue (𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  ), is regarded as the end 

frame  𝐹 𝑒 .

When anomalous frames exist in  𝑉 𝑀  , i.e., in case (B) 

where an action present in the manual is not performed, the 

start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  can likewise be detected by 

changing the scanning direction of Algorithm 1 from 

column -wise to row -wise. In this way, by applying the 

processing of Algorithm 1 in both the row and column 

directions of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  , the proposed method detects frames 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

depicting candidate actions that may contain expert know -

how, as described in Section  III .

The direction of the above filtering process is determined 

as follows: when  𝑁 𝑀  < 𝑁 𝐸  , the difference is regarded as case 

(A), i.e., an additional action by the expert, and the filtering 

is performed in the column direction of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ; otherwise, it 

is regarded as case (B), i.e., an action skipped by the expert, 

and the filtering is performed in the row direction. 

Figure 5 shows a conceptual diagram of filtering applied 

to  𝑆 fmap  using Algorithm 1. Figure 5(a) shows the case 

where  𝑉 𝐸  contains (A) an action additionally performed 

because the expert independently judged it necessary, and 

Figure 5(b) shows the case where anomalous frames exist in 

𝑉 𝑀 , i.e., (B) an action present in the manual is not performed. 

For the  𝑆 fmap  shown in Figure 5, the average maximum 

similarity is computed by Eq. ( 3), and the anomalousity of 

each frame is sequentially judged by Eq. ( 4), as indicated by 

the arrows in Figures 5(a) and 5(b). 

Algorithm 1 Average filtering process for detecting 

anomalous frame 

Require:  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 , 𝜏 

Ensure:  𝐹 𝑠 , 𝐹 𝑒 

𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒  ⇐ ∑ max  (𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑙 )

> 𝑁 𝐸
> 𝑙 =0

𝑁 𝐸 

(3)

𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  = 𝜙 

for  𝑘  = 0 to  𝑁 𝐸  do 

if  max (𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝 ,𝑘 ) ≤ 𝜏  ∗ 𝑀𝑎𝑥𝐴𝑣𝑒  (4) then 

𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  = 𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  ⋃ 𝑘 

end if 

end for 

𝐹 𝑠  ⇐ 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐹𝑖𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 (𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠  )

𝐹 𝑒  ⇐ 𝐺𝑒𝑡𝐸𝑛𝑑𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 (𝐹 𝑎𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑜𝑢𝑠 )      

> FIGURE 5. Conceptual diagram of filtering applied to 𝑺 𝐟𝐦𝐚𝐩 .(a) An
> example of detected anomalous frames in 𝑽 𝑬 .(b) An example of
> detected anomalous frames in 𝑽 𝑴 .

D.  Video Segmentation Based on a Self -Similarity Map 

The similarity map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  created in Section  IV -B can 

quantify the frame -to -frame correspondence between the 

manual video  𝑉 𝑀  and the expert video  𝑉 𝐸  , and is therefore 

effective for extracting candidate actions contained only in 

one of the videos. On the other hand, even when the action 

itself is the same, differences in the work scene, such as the 

work target or work location, may contain know -how related 

to the expert’ s judgment. However, in the previous method 

[12] , image descriptions are generated independently for 

each video, and thus the focus of the description generation 

is not necessarily aligned across videos. As a result, 

differences between descriptions may be caused not by 

differences in judgment -relevant  work scenes but by 

mismatches in attention. To avoid this problem, one possible 

approach is to input pairs of images, one from  𝑉 𝑀  and one 

from  𝑉 𝐸  , into a VLM and directly compare image pairs. 

However, this approach has the drawback that the number of 

comparisons increases and the computational cost grows 

quadratically. In addition, a description generator that takes 

image pairs as input may generat e different descriptions 

depending on subtle differences between temporally 

adjacent images, which may lead to degraded extraction 

accuracy due to erroneous decision -scene extraction based 

on incorrect descriptions. Therefore, in this study, the videos 

are  segmented into semantically stable intervals based on the 

self -similarity map of each video, and inter -video 

comparison is performed at the segment level, thereby 

achieving both robustness and computational efficiency in 

decision -scene extraction. In addi tion, candidate action 

extraction is realized, as in the previous method, by filtering 

a frame -level similarity map, and is handled within a unified 

framework together with decision -scene extraction. 

First, as shown in Figure 6(a), cosine similarities are 

computed between the latent vectors in  Vec 𝑀  , which 

correspond to the corrected caption set  𝐶 ̃𝑀  defined in Eq. ( 2)

in Section  IV -B, to create a similarity map  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝑀  whose 

elements are similarities between image descriptions within 

a single video.  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝑀  is an  𝑁 𝑀  × 𝑁 𝑀  matrix, and the 

element in the  𝑖  -th row and  𝑗  -th column represents the 

similarity between the  𝑖  -th frame image  𝐼 𝑖  

> 𝑀

and the  𝑗  -th 

frame image  𝐼 𝑗  

> 𝑀

in  𝑉 𝑀 . The same procedure is applied to  𝑉 𝐸 

to create  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝐸  . 𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝐸  is an  𝑁 𝐸  × 𝑁 𝐸  matrix, and the 

element in the  𝑖  -th row and  𝑗  -th column represents the 

similarity between the  𝑖  -th frame image  𝐼 𝑖  

> 𝐸

and the  𝑗  -th 

frame image  𝐼 𝑗  

> 𝐸

in  𝑉 𝐸  .

Next, as shown in Figure 6(b),  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  are segmented 

according to the diagonal blocks of the self -similarity maps 

𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝑀  and  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝐸  . To clearly distinguish diagonal blocks 

composed of highly similar elements from the other regions 

in the self -similarity maps, the maps are treated as grayscale 

images and binarized using a threshold, producing binary 

maps  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝑀  

> 𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑦

and  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝐸  

> 𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑦

, in which highly similar diagonal 

blocks appear white and the other regions appear black. 

Then, the Connected Component method  [25]  is applied 

to  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝑀  

> 𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑦

and  𝑆 𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑓 ,𝐸  

> 𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑦

, respectively, to extract connected 

components of white regions. Among the extracted 

connected components, those located on the diagonal and 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX         

> FIGURE 6. Video segmentation process based on a self -similarity map. (a) Calculation of self -similarity map 𝑺 𝒔𝒆𝒍𝒇 .(b) Binarization of the self -similarity
> map and video segmentation.
> FIGURE 7. Generation process of the segment similarity map. (a) Overview of segment similarity map 𝑺 𝐬𝐦𝐚𝐩 .(b) Details of the segment similarity
> calculation process in (a).

having an area greater than or equal to a given threshold are 

regarded as a sequence of video segments, denoted by  𝑆𝑒𝑔 .

𝑆𝑒𝑔  is defined by Eq. ( 5): 

𝑆𝑒𝑔  = [𝑠 𝑖  = [𝐹 𝑖 𝑠 , 𝐹 𝑖 𝑒 ] ∣ 0 ≤ 𝑖  ≤ 𝐿 ] (5)

Here, for each segment  𝑠 𝑖 , the start frame  𝐹 𝑖 𝑠  and end frame 

𝐹 𝑖 𝑒 , corresponding to the extent of the component along the 

diagonal direction, are obtained and defined as the 

boundaries of the video segment. By computing  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝑀  and 

𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝐸  for  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  , respectively, multiple semantically 

stable video segments are obtained for each video. Section 

IV -E describes how similarities are computed for all 

combinations of these segments to create a segment -level 

similarity map. 

E.  Construction of a Segment -Level Similarity Map 

Using  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝑀  and  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝐸 , which are the segment sequences 

created for  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  in Section  IV -D, a similarity map 

𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝  is constructed whose elements are the similarities 

between pairs of video segments. Figure 7(a) shows an 

overview of the generation process of  𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝 .

As shown in Figure 7(a), all possible pairs are formed 

between the segments constituting  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝑀  and those 

constituting  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝐸  , and the similarity for each pair is 

calculated. 

Figure 7(b) shows the details of the similarity calculation 

for a pair of video segments. First, frames are sampled from 

segment  𝑠 𝑀 𝑖  , which is a segment constituting  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝑀  , to 

obtain images  𝐼 𝑀 𝑖  

> 𝑘

. Similarly, frames are sampled from 

segment  𝑠 𝐸 𝑗  , which is a segment constituting  𝑆𝑒 𝑔 𝐸  , to 

obtain images  𝐼 𝐸 𝑗  

> 𝑙

. Next, using a VLM  (𝑀 𝑒𝑥𝑝 ) that can 

accept multiple images as input, a scene -consistency 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

description  𝐸 𝑆 𝑘 ,𝑙  , indicating whether  𝐼 𝑀 𝑖  

> 𝑘

and  𝐼 𝐸 𝑗  

> 𝑙

depict the 

same scene, is generated according to Eq. ( 6): 

𝐸 𝑆 𝑘 ,𝑙  = 𝑀 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (𝐼 𝑀 𝑖  

> 𝑘

, 𝐼 𝐸 𝑗  

> 𝑙

, 𝑃 𝑒𝑥𝑝 ) (6)

Here,  𝑃 𝑒𝑥𝑝  is a prompt instructing the model to determine 

whether the two input images belong to the same scene. 

Specifically,  𝑃 𝑒𝑥𝑝  instructs the model to answer “Yes” if the 

two images depict the same scene, and “No” otherwise. 

However, depending on the prompt -following ability of the 

VLM  (𝑀 𝑒𝑥𝑝  ), the model may produce variations of these 

answers, such as alternative expressions conveying  “Yes ” or 

“No ”, or additional explanations following  “Yes ” or  “No ”.

Therefore, it is necessary to introduce a mechanism for 

automatically determining whether the free -form scene -

consistency description  𝐸 𝑆 𝑘 ,𝑙  indicates that the two images 

belong to the same scene. 

To this end, the proposed method compares the latent 

vector  𝑣 𝑘 ,𝑙  , corresponding to the scene -consistency 

description  𝐸 𝑆 𝑘 ,𝑙 , with template latent vectors  𝑣 yes  and  𝑣 no ,

corresponding to template sentences explicitly indicating 

“Yes” and “No,” using a text encoder  𝜙 𝑇𝑆 . Specifically, the 

dissimilarity probability  𝑃 (𝑘 , 𝑙 ) of  𝑣 𝑘 ,𝑙  with respect to the 

template sentences is computed according to Eq. ( 7): 

𝑃 (𝑘 , 𝑙 ) = exp  (⟨𝑣 𝑘 ,𝑙 , 𝑣 no ⟩)

exp  (⟨𝑣 𝑘 ,𝑙 , 𝑣 no ⟩) + exp  (⟨𝑣 𝑘 ,𝑙 , 𝑣 yes ⟩) (7)

As in Eq. ( 2), cosine similarity is used for comparing latent 

vectors, and the similarity operation is denoted by  ⟨⋅,⋅⟩. If the 

dissimilarity probability  𝑃 (𝑘 , 𝑙 ) is higher than the threshold 

𝑡 ℎexp , the two images are judged not to belong to the same 

scene, and their similarity is set to 0. Otherwise, the two 

images are judged to belong to the same scene, and their 

similarity is set to 1. 

This frame sampling process and judgment process are 

performed at equal intervals for an arbitrary number of 

frames within  𝑠 𝑀 𝑖  and  𝑠 𝐸 𝑗  . The results are then integrated 

such that, if even one of the sampled comparisons yields a 

similarity of 0, the similarity of the segment pair is set to 0; 

otherwise, it is set to 1. This integrated value is used as the 

similarity between the two segment s, i.e., as each element of 

the segment -level similarity map  𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝 . Finally, the filtering 

process described in Section  IV -C is applied to the 

constructed  𝑆 smap . In decision -scene extraction, the filtering 

is performed in the column direction of  𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝  in order to 

detect the start frame  𝐹 𝑠  and end frame  𝐹 𝑒  within the 

anomalous frames of  𝑉 𝐸  .  

> V. EXPERIMENT
> A. Overview

In this study, using maintenance tasks for distribution 

panels as the target scenario, we created a work video based 

on a manual and videos of expert work, and conducted 

experiments to automatically extract candidate actions and 

candidate decision scenes that may contain expert know -how. 

First, a worker performed the task according to the manual, 

and a first -person -view  video  𝑉 𝑀  was recorded during the 

work. Next, the worker performed the task while adding 

actions corresponding to expert  behavior and  recorded a 

video  𝑉 𝐸  that included (A) actions additionally performed 

because the expert independently judged them necessary. In 

addition, for experiments assuming the formalization of 

expert behavior in which redundant actions described in the 

manual are appropriately skipped , the worker performed the 

task without executing (B) certain actions in the  manual and 

recorded the resulting video  𝑉 𝐸  . Furthermore, for 

experiments aimed at detecting differences in decision 

scenes as a basis for formalizing the expert’s situational 

judgment, the worker recorded a video  𝑉 𝐸  containing work 

performed in a different scene. In this experiment,  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸 

were compared to extract candidate actions and candidate 

decision scenes that may contain expert know -how.  

> B. Collected data

In this experiment, data were collected for the following 

three maintenance tasks related to distribution panels: 

(task1) breaker shutdown work for a distribution panel, 

(task2) inspection work of a work room before a distribution 

panel shutdown operation, and 

(task3) disassembly work of a management PC for a

distribution panel. 

For task1, as shown in  𝑉 𝑀  in Figure 2(a), the following 

actions were defined as manual -based actions and recorded 

in  𝑉 𝑀  : checking the distribution panel breaker and turning 

the breaker OFF. In contrast to these actions, as shown in  𝑉 𝐸 

in Figure 2(a), the following were added as (A) expert 

actions and recorded in  𝑉 𝐸  : checking the connected devices 

in the outlet box connected to the breaker before turning the 

breaker OFF (A -1), and checking related equipment below 

the distribution panel before turning the breaker OFF (A -2). 

The recording of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  for (A -1) in task1 was conducted 

in two different buildings (Building 1 and Building 2). In 

Building 1, one worker collected one  𝑉 𝑀  and three  𝑉 𝐸  videos, 

and another worker collected one  𝑉 𝐸  video. In Building 2, 

two workers each collected one  𝑉 𝑀  and one  𝑉 𝐸  . In addition, 

the recording of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  for (A -2) in task1 was conducted 

in Building 1, where one worker collected one  𝑉 𝑀  and one 

𝑉 𝐸  . As a result, a total of seven pairs of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  were 

collected for the extraction experiment of candidate expert 

actions in task1. 

In addition, as expert videos  𝑉 𝐸  containing decision 

scenes different from those in  𝑉 𝑀 , as shown in Figure 2(c), 

we collected (c -1) expert videos in which the work scene 

differs throughout the entire video, and (c -2) expert videos 

in which only part of the work scene differs from  𝑉 𝑀 . The 

videos in (c -2) further include two cases: one in which the 

manual -based action and the expert action are the  same,  but 

part of the work scene differs, and another in which the 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

expert performs an additional action, resulting in a partial 

change in the work scene. For (c -1), we assumed the same 

breaker shutdown task but targeting a different distribution 

panel. One pair was collected in which the work video from 

Building 1 was tre ated as  𝑉 𝑀  and the work video from 

Building 2 was treated as  𝑉 𝐸  , and two pairs were collected in 

which the work video from Building 2 was treated as  𝑉 𝑀  and 

the work video from Building 1 was treated as  𝑉 𝐸  . For (c -2), 

we assumed tasks in which part of the work scene in 

𝑉 𝐸  differs from  𝑉 𝑀  because one of the following actions is 

added: checking the connected devices in the outlet box 

connected to the breaker before turning the breaker OFF (c -

2-1), opening the door of the distribution panel (c -2-2), or 

turning on a lighting switch (c -2-3). Th ree pairs of  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝑉 𝐸  containing action (c -2-1) in  𝑉 𝐸  were collected; however, 

one of these pairs was also used as a pair for the extraction 

experiment of candidate expert actions, so only two pairs 

were newly collected. In addition, one pair containing action 

(c -2-2) in  𝑉 𝐸  and one pair containing action (c -2-3) in  𝑉 𝐸 

were collected. As a result, a total of eight pairs of  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝑉 𝐸  were collected for the extraction experiment of candidate 

expert decision scenes in task1. 

For task2, as shown in  𝑉 𝑀  in Figure 2( b), the following 

were defined as manual -based actions and recorded in  𝑉 𝑀 :

checking the desk, door, air -conditioner power supply, and 

distribution panel in that order. In contrast to these actions, 

the following were added as (A) expert actions and recorded 

in  𝑉 𝐸  : actually,  moving to the air conditioner and confirming 

that it was not operating (A -1), and storing equipment if 

equipment was present on the desk (A -2). The recording of 

𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  for task2 was conducted in Building 1, and one 

𝑉 𝑀  , one  𝑉 𝐸  including action (A -1), and one  𝑉 𝐸  including 

action (A -2) were collected for each of two workers. In 

addition, as a video recording expert behavior of type (B), a 

𝑉 𝐸  video was recorded in which the action of checking the 

door was not performed. For this type -(B) recording, one 

worker collected one  𝑉 𝐸  , and the other worker collected two 

𝑉 𝐸  videos. As a result, a total of seven pairs of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸 

were collected for the extraction experiment of candidate 

expert actions in task2. 

In addition, as expert videos  𝑉 𝐸  containing decision 

scenes different from those in  𝑉 𝑀 , we collected, as in task1, 

(c -1) expert videos in which the work scene differs 

throughout the video, and (c -2) expert videos in which only 

part of the work scene differs. For (c -1), we first assumed the 

same inspection task but in a different target room . One pair 

was collected in which the work video from Building 1 was 

treated as  𝑉 𝑀  and the work video from Building 2 was treated 

as  𝑉 𝐸  . We also assumed the same inspection task under a 

different lighting  environment and  collected one pair in 

which a work video recorded under a normal environment 

was treated as  𝑉 𝑀  , and a work video recorded in a dark 

environment without lighting was treated as  𝑉 𝐸  .

For (c -2), we assumed tasks in which part of the work 

scene in  𝑉 𝐸  differs from  𝑉 𝑀  because one of the following is 

added: a task in which equipment is stored when equipment 

is present on the desk (c -2-1), or a task in which the worker 

continues the work while ignoring the equipment left on the 

desk (c -2-2). One pair of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  containing action (c -2-

1) in  𝑉 𝐸  was collected; however, this pair was also used as a 

pair for the extraction experiment of candidate expert actions 

and was therefore not newly collected. One pair of  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝑉 𝐸  containing action (c -2-2) in  𝑉 𝐸  was also collected. As a 

result, a total of four pairs of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  were collected for 

the extraction experiment of candidate expert decision 

scenes in task2. 

For task3, as manual -based actions, the sequence of 

separating a desktop PC used for distribution panel 

management into the CPU cooler, GPU, and memory, in that 

order, was defined and recorded in  𝑉 𝑀 . In contrast, as a video 

recording expert behavior of type (B), a 𝑉 𝐸  video was 

recorded in which the memory was not removed. One worker 

collected one  𝑉 𝑀  and one  𝑉 𝐸  . As a result, a total of one pair 

of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  was collected for the extraction experiment of 

candidate expert actions in task3. 

Consequently, a total of 15 pairs were collected across 

tasks 1 to 3 for the extraction experiment of candidate expert 

actions. In addition, a total of 12 pairs were collected across 

tasks 1 to 3 for the extraction experiment of candidate expert 

decision s cenes.  The operators  wore a Microsoft Hololens2 

integrated helmet  [26]  for data collection. Th e operators 

recorded data via a modified StreamRecorder  application 

from Hololens2ForCV library  [27] , modified to start and 

stop recording and to display holograms.  

> C. Metrics

For each collected  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  , the start frame  𝐹 𝑆 𝑔𝑡  and end 

frame  𝐹 𝐸 𝑔𝑡  of each action and each work scene in the video 

were manually annotated to create ground -truth data. In this 

report, to evaluate the automatic extraction of candidate 

actions and candidate decision scenes that may contain 

expert know -how, we used the metri c shown in Eq. ( 8), 

which calculates how well the interval defined by the 

extracted start frame  𝐹 𝑆  and end frame  𝐹 𝐸  covers the ground -

truth interval defined by the start frame  𝐹 𝑆 𝑔𝑡  and end frame 

𝐹 𝐸 𝑔𝑡  . Eq. ( 8) was computed for each collected pair of data, 

and the average value over all pairs was used for evaluation. 

𝐴𝑐 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑜𝑛  =

(𝐹 𝐸  − 𝐹 𝑆  + 1) ∩ (𝐹 𝐸 𝑔𝑡  − 𝐹 𝑆 𝑔𝑡  + 1)

(𝐹 𝐸  − 𝐹 𝑆  + 1) ∪ (𝐹 𝐸 𝑔𝑡  − 𝐹 𝑆 𝑔𝑡  + 1)

(8)

In the extraction experiment for candidate actions, for pairs 

in which the type of candidate action was incorrectly 

estimated, such as estimating an action addition when the 

action was actually  skipped or  estimating an action skip 

when the action was actually added, the value of Eq. ( 8) was 

set to 0. In addition, the extraction time for each pair was also 

measured. 

To confirm the effectiveness of the proposed method, 

comparative experiments with conventional methods were 

conducted. In addition to the previous method  [12] , a method 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

in which prompt instructions were given to the VLM used in 

the previous method  [12]  (hereafter referred to as previous 

method + instruction prompt) was evaluated in order to 

examine whether prompt instructions to the VLM increase or 

decrease extraction performance. Furthermore, in order to 

confirm the effectiveness of the video segmentat ion and 

segment -level similarity -map -based decision process of the 

proposed method, a method that directly compares each 

image of the videos by simultaneously inputting them  into  an 

image -description generator (hereafter referred to as the 

naive method) wa s also evaluated. In addition, as a simple 

method for comparing two videos, a method that compares 

two videos using a video -capable VLM (hereafter referred to 

as the video comparison method) was also evaluated. 

To select the VLM  (𝑀 𝑐𝑎𝑝 ) used in the proposed method, the 

following models were tested in the candidate -action 

extraction experiment: BLIP -2 [28] , InstructBLIP  [29] ,

InternVL2  [30] , LLaVA  [31] , and Qwen3 -VL -Instruct  [32] ,

which had also been used in the previous method. InternVL2, 

which achieved the best performance, was adopted (details 

are described in Section  VI ). In addition, the text encoder  𝜙 𝑇 

used for candidate -action extraction in Section  IV -B was 

ImageBind  [33] . The threshold  𝜏  in Algorithm 1 was set to 

0.6 with reference to the previous method  [12] . The 

binarization process used for video segmentation in Section 

IV -D employed the binarization function provided by 

OpenCV  [25] , with the threshold set to 100. Furthermore, the 

text encoder  𝜙 𝑇𝑆  described in Section  IV -E was 

SentenceBERT  [34] , and the threshold  𝑡 ℎ𝑒𝑥𝑝  was set to 0. 5.

The sampling process was performed five times. In addition, 

Qwen3 -VL -Instruct, which can perform inference on 

multiple images, was used as  𝑀 𝑒𝑥𝑝 .

VI.  RESULTS 

Figure 8 shows an example of the frame -level similarity 

map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  generated by the proposed method from  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝑉 𝐸  for task1. As shown in Figure 8, the action of turning the 

distribution panel breaker OFF is present in both  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  ,

and the corresponding region in the similarity map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  is 

confirmed to have high similarity. In this way, actions that 

are present in both  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  exhibit high similarity in the 

corresponding regions of  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  . In contrast, the action of 

checking the connected devices in the outlet box connected 

to the breaker before turning the breaker OFF does not exist 

in any part of  𝑉 𝑀  , and therefore the corresponding region 

shows low similarity when the similarity map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  is 

viewed in the column direction. These results confirm that 

the similarity map  𝑆 𝑓𝑚𝑎𝑝  generated by the proposed method 

can represent regions depicting candidate actions that may 

contain expert know -how in the manual -based work video 

and the expert work video.                                      

> FIGURE 8. Example of the frame similarity map 𝑺 𝐟𝐦𝐚𝐩 generated from 𝑽 𝑴
> and 𝑽 𝑬 using the proposed method.
> FIGURE 9. Example of the segment similarity map 𝑺 𝐬𝐦𝐚𝐩 generated from
> 𝑽 𝑴 and 𝑽 𝑬 using the proposed method.
> TABLE I
> EXTRACTION RESULTS OF CANDIDATE ACTIONS FOR THE VLM USED IN THE
> PROPOSED METHOD
> VLM Params. of
> VLM
> 𝐴𝑐 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑜𝑛 Inference time
> BLIP -22.7B 53.0 %3 min
> InstructBLIP 7B 44.0 %8 min
> LLaVA 7B 63.0 %7 min
> InternVL2 4B 65.0 %6 min
> Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B 49.0 %5 min

Figure 9 shows an example of the segment -level similarity 

map  𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝  generated by the proposed method from  𝑉 𝑀  and 

𝑉 𝐸  for task1. As shown in Figure 9, for the same work scene 

in  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  , the corresponding region in the similarity map 

𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝  is confirmed to have high similarity. On the other hand, 

checking the connected devices in the outlet box connected 

to the breaker before turning the breaker OFF causes a 

change in the work scene, and since this work scene does not 

exist in any part of  𝑉 𝑀 , the corresponding region shows low 

similarity when the similarity map  𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝  is viewed in the 

column direction. These results confirm that the segment -

level similarity map  𝑆 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑝  generated by the proposed 

method can represent regions depicting candidate decision 

scenes that may contain expert know -how in the manual -

based work video and the expert work video. 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

TABLE  II

EVALUATION RESULTS ON THE COLLECTED DATA USING THE PROPOSED METHOD AND THE BASELINE METHODS                                                                                      

> Target type Method ID Method VLM Params. of VLM 𝐴𝑐 𝑐 𝑢𝑛𝑖𝑜𝑛 Inference time
> Action (a) Previous method [12] BLIP -22.7B 59.0 %2min
> (b) Baseline (video) Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B27 .0 %0.5 min
> (c) Baseline (Naive) Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B28 .0 %36 min
> (d) Proposed method InternVL2 4B 65.0 %6 min
> Scene (e) Previous method [12] BLIP -22.7 B33 .0 %2min
> (f) Baseline
> (Previous+prompt)
> BLIP -22.7B 28.0 % 2 min
> (g) Baseline
> (Previous+prompt)
> InstructBLIP 7B 28.0 % 8 min
> (h) Baseline
> (Previous+prompt)
> LLaVA 7B 36.0 % 11 min
> (i) Baseline
> (Previous+prompt)
> InternVL2 4B 31.0 % 32 min
> (j) Baseline
> (Previous+prompt)
> Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B 37.0 % 26 min
> (k) Baseline (Video) Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B 43.0 % 1 min
> (l) Baseline (Naive) Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B 46.0 % 36 min
> (m) Proposed method Qwen3 -VL -Instruct 8B 61.0 % 3 min
> FIGURE 10. Comparison between the segment similarity map 𝑺 𝒔𝒎𝒂𝒑 of
> the proposed method (m) and the frame similarity map 𝑺 𝒇𝒎𝒂𝒑 of the
> baseline naive method (l).
> FIGURE 11. Example of a failure case of the proposed method.

Table 1 shows the action -candidate extraction results 

obtained with different VLMs used in the proposed method. 

As shown in Table 1, the extraction accuracy of candidate 

actions varies depending on the VLM used. In this 

experiment, InternVL2, which achieve d the highest accuracy, 

was adopted as the VLM  ( 𝑀 cap  ) for candidate -action 

extraction. 

Table 2 shows the evaluation results on the collected data 

using the proposed method and the baseline methods. As 

shown in the action -candidate extraction results in Table 2, 

the proposed method (d) achieved an accuracy of 65.0% for 

extracting candidate actions that may contain expert know -

how, which is 6 percentage points higher than that of the 

previous method (a). It can also be seen that the proposed 

method extracts candidate actions containing expert know -

how more accurately than  the other baseline met hods, 

namely the naive method (c) and the video comparison 

method (b). In terms of computation time, the proposed 

method (d) required several minutes, which is of the same 

order as that of the previous method (a). 

In addition, as shown in the decision -scene candidate 

extraction results in Table 2, the proposed method (m) 

achieved an accuracy of 61.0% for extracting candidate 

decision scenes that may contain expert know -how, which is 

28 percentage points higher than  that of the previous method 

(e). It can also be seen that the proposed method extracts 

candidate decision scenes containing expert know -how more 

accurately than the other baseline methods, namely the 

previous method  + instruction prompt methods (f) –(j), th e

naive method (l), and the video comparison method (k). In 

terms of computation time, the proposed method (m) 

required several minutes, which is of the same order as that 

of the previous method (e). 

Figure 10 shows an example comparison between the 

similarity map of the naive method (l) and that of the 

proposed method (m). Ideally, all regions inside the red box 

are expected to become black, that is, to exhibit low 

similarity. However, compared with t he proposed method 

(m), the naive method (l) contains scattered white regions, 

that is, regions of high similarity. In the naive method (l), 

images from the two videos are directly treated as pairs for 

judgment. However, the image description generator may 

generate different descriptions depending on subtle 

differences between temporally adjacent images, which is 

considered to cause such scattered high -similarity regions 

and consequently reduce the extraction accuracy. 

Figure 11 shows an example failure case of the proposed 

method (m) for extracting decision -scene candidates. In this 

example, the manual -based work video  𝑉 𝑀  shows the 

distribution panel door open, whereas the expert work video 

𝑉 𝐸  shows the distribution panel door closed, and therefore 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

this case is expected to be extracted as a candidate decision 

scene. One reason for this failure is that the prompt input to 

the VLM during decision -scene candidate extraction 

includes a prompt for determining whether the two images 

were recorded at the sa me location (described in Appendix 

A-C). Since  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  were recorded at the same location, 

this judgment is appropriate with respect to the input prompt. 

On the other hand, the prompt is not designed to determine 

differences in the state of the work target, which should be 

extracted as candidate decision scene s. Therefore, prompt 

adjustment and improvement methods tailored to the target 

work situation are considered necessary.  

> VII. CONCLUSION

In the inspection and maintenance of infrastructure 

facilities, there is a shortage of skilled maintenance workers, 

and there is a strong need to formalize and transfer the work 

know -how of skilled workers in order to accelerate the 

training of new mainten ance personnel. In particular, when 

the target is know -how of which even skilled workers 

themselves are not consciously aware, it is difficult to extract 

such knowledge through interviews and similar methods, 

and therefore a technique is required to effici ently extract 

candidate know -how from work videos. Conventionally, 

differences between a manual video and an expert video have 

made it possible to extract candidate actions corresponding 

to “what to do,” whereas stable extraction of situational 

judgment kn ow -how corresponding to “where” and “which 

one to operate” (i.e., decision scenes) has remained a

challenge. 

In this report, we proposed a method for manual videos 

and expert videos that extracts candidate actions through 

inter -video comparison based on image descriptions and 

extracts candidate decision scenes through comparison at the 

level of segmented interval s based on intra -video self -

similarity. The proposed method realizes the extraction of 

both candidate actions and candidate decision scenes within 

a unified framework. Its key feature is that, by extending the 

comparison unit in decision -scene extraction f rom the frame 

level to the interval level, it suppresses both the degradation 

in extraction accuracy caused by instability in generated 

descriptions and the increase in computational cost. Based 

on the above method, we developed a technique for 

automatical ly extracting candidate actions and candidate 

decision scenes that may contain  know -how and  obtained the 

following conclusions. 

i.  Through evaluation using a total of 27  data 

simulating distribution panel maintenance tasks, we 

confirmed that the proposed technique operates with 

computation time comparable to that of the previous 

method  [12] .

ii.  The extraction rate was 65.0% for candidate actions 

(+6 points over the previous method) and 61.0% for 

candidate decision scenes (+28 points over the 

previous method), both outperforming the previous 

method. 

iii.  These results demonstrate that the proposed 

technique can improve the extraction rates of 

candidate actions and candidate decision scenes 

while maintaining computation time, suggesting that 

it can support the extraction of candidates for 

formalizing work know -how that even skilled 

maintenance workers themselves may not be 

consciously aware of. 

Future work will focus on enhancing the accuracy of the 

proposed method by analyzing actions and decision -making 

scenes at a finer level of granularity. Furthermore, we plan 

to develop a technique to detect the reordering of work 

procedures, as such adjust ments often represent a key 

component of expert expertise. Finally, while the current 

evaluation was limited to simulated distribution board 

maintenance experiments, we aim to verify the 

generalizability of our approach by applying it to a broader 

range of  practical tasks.  

> APPENDIX A
> Overview of the Video Comparison Method

An overview of the video comparison method (k), which is 

one of the comparison methods used in this study, is given 

below. The video comparison method consists of two steps. In 

the first step, event detection and event descriptions are output 

as captions f or each of the videos  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  . This method is 

based on the implementation provided in the official GitHub 

repository of Qwen3 -VL. In the second step, the captions 

obtained for each video are input to a VLM, which outputs, as 

captions, which events in one video do not exist in the othe r

video. Based on this output, candidate actions and candidate 

decision scenes are extracted.  

> A. Event Detection

First, using a VLM capable of video captioning, denoted by 

𝑀 vid  , event detection and descriptions for the video are 

generated according to Eqs. ( 9) and ( 10 ): 

𝐸  = 𝑀 vid (𝑉 , 𝑃 𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒  ) (9)

𝐸  = {(𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , 𝑒𝑛𝑑 , 𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 )𝑖  | 0 ≤ 𝑖  ≤ 𝐾 } (10 )

Here,  𝐸  is a set whose elements consist of the detected start 

time  𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑡 , end time  𝑒𝑛𝑑 , and description  𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛  for 

each event, and  𝑃 𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒  is the captioning instruction prompt. 

Caption generation is performed for both  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  ,

producing the captions  𝐸 𝑀  for  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝐸 𝐸  for  𝑉 𝐸  . The same 

captioning model is used for both  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  . 

> B. Anomaly Detection Using Event Detection

Next, extraction of candidate actions and candidate decision 

scenes using the captions  𝐸 𝑀  and  𝐸 𝐸  of  𝑉 𝑀  and  𝑉 𝐸  is 

performed according to Eq. ( 11 ): 8 VOLUME XX, XXXX 

𝐴𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑦  𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡  = 𝑀 𝑣𝑖𝑑  (𝐸 𝑀  , 𝐸 𝐸  , 𝑃 𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑜  ) (11 )

Here,  𝑃 vidano  is the anomaly -event detection instruction 

prompt.  Anomaly  Event  is a caption containing information 

about which event in one video does not exist in the other 

video.  However, because  𝐴𝑛𝑜𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑦  𝐸𝑣𝑒𝑛𝑡  is produced in a 

free -description format, the output may not always be fixed, 

making it difficult to process automatically in a unified 

manner. Therefore, in the  last step , a human checks 

Anomaly  Event  and performs post -processing required for 

computing the evaluation metric. For example, when the 

detected event  start  and end times are output in seconds, they 

are converted into frame units.  

> C. Prompts Used in This Study

The following prompt was used as  𝑃 𝑐𝑎𝑝  in the proposed 

method (m) described in Section  IV -B. 

“You are describing an egocentric view images. Focus on 

operator's action and the object being acted upon. Describe 

the concrete action shortly. Avoid mentioning the location or 

goal  - only describe the specific action and target visible in the 

frame.” 

The following prompt was used  as  𝑃 𝑒𝑥𝑝  in the proposed 

method (m) described in Section  IV -E.

“Do the two images show the same location? Answer ‘Yes’ or 

‘No’.” 

The following prompt was used as the instruction prompt 

for extracting candidate decision scenes in the baseline 

methods (previous method + instruction prompt), (f) to (j). 

“Describe where you are in detail.” 

The following prompt was used as the instruction prompt 

for extracting candidate actions in the naive method ( c). 

“Do the two images show the same Action? Answer ‘Yes’ or 

‘No’.” 

The following prompt was used as the instruction prompt 

for extracting candidate decision scenes in the naive method 

(l). 

“Do the two images show the same location? Answer ‘Yes’ or 

‘No’.” 

For  𝑃 𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒  in  Appendix A -A of the video comparison 

method ( b), the following prompt was used for extracting 

candidate actions. 

“Localize a series of activity events in the video, output the 

start and end timestamp for each event, and describe each 

event with sentences. Provide the result in json format with 

‘mm:ss.ff’ format for time depiction.” 

For  𝑃 𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑣𝑒  in  Appendix A -A of the video comparison 

method (k), the following prompt was used for extracting 

candidate decision scenes. 

“Localize a series of locations in the video, output the start 

and end timestamp for each locations, and describe each 

locations with sentences. Provide the result in json format with 

‘mm:ss.ff’ format for time depiction.” 

For  𝑃 𝑣𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑛𝑜  in  Appendix A -B of the video comparison 

method  (b) and  (k), the following prompt was used for both 

candidate -action extraction and candidate -decision -scene 

extraction. In practice,  𝐸 𝑀  and  𝐸 𝐸  , which are the outputs of the 

VLM in  Appendix A -A, are passed to {captions of the 

reference video} and {captions of the target video}. 

“A series of locations in the reference video: 

{captions of the reference video} 

A series of locations in the target video: 

{captions of the target video} 

Based on the above two sets of locations, detect anomalies 

between the reference and target videos. 

Define anomalies as follows: 

- "additional anomaly": a locations that appears in the 

target video but does not exist in the reference video. 

- "unseen anomaly": a locations that appears in the 

reference video but does not appear in the target video. 

Determine which type of anomaly is present, and output 

** only one type ** —either additional anomalies or unseen 

anomalies, whichever is detected. 

Do not output both types simultaneously. 

For the detected anomaly type, output the result in the same 

JSON format as before, including: 

- the start and end timestamps (‘mm:ss.ff’), 

- ** the anomaly type **  (“additional anomaly” or 

“unseen anomaly”), 

- a description of the locations, 

- and a brief explanation of why it is classified as that 

anomaly type.”     

> REFERENCES
> [1] Recruit Works Institute, "Future Predictions 2040 in Japan,"
> [Online]. Available: https://www.gii.co.jp/report/tbrc1465862 -
> power -plant -maintenance -global -market -report.html. [Accessed 11
> March 2025].
> [2] E. Fenoglio, E. Kazim, H. Latapie and A. Koshiyama, "Tacit
> knowledge elicitation process for industry 4.0," Discover Artificial
> Intelligence, 2022. 8VOLUME XX, XXXX

[3]  International Atomic Energy Agency, "Knowledge Management for 

Nuclear Industry Operating Organizations," International Nuclear 

Information System & Nuclear Knowledge Management Section 

International Atomic Energy Agency, 2006. 

[4]  M. Nakanishi , Y. Kido, “Externalization and Formalization of 

"Tacit Knowledge": Case of Skills Transfer of Pilot Boat 

Operations,” Sanno University Bulletin, 2017. 

[5]  S. Kernan Freire, C. Wang, S. Ruiz -Arenas and E. Niforatos, "Tacit 

Knowledge Elicitation for Shop -floor Workers with an Intelligent 

Assistant," CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 

Systems, 2023. 

[6]  R. Mancy and N. Reid, "Using interviews to investigate implicit 

knowledge in computer programming," Proceedings of the 7th 

international conference on Learning sciences, 2006. 

[7]  R. R. Hoffman, N. R. Shadbolt, A. Burton and G. Klein, "Eliciting 

knowledge from experts: A methodological analysis," 

Organizational behavior and human decision processes, 1995. 

[8]  J. Summerscales, "Harvesting tacit knowledge for composites 

workforce development," Composites Part A: Applied Science and 

Manufacturing, 2024. 

[9]  T. Gavrilova, "Knowledge elicitation techniques in a knowledge 

management context," Journal of Knowledge Management, 2012. 

[10]  R. R. Hoffman, "A survey of methods for eliciting the knowledge of 

experts," ACM SIGART Bulletin, 1989. 

[11]  N. Shadbolt and P. R. Smart, "Knowledge Elicitation: Methods, 

Tools and Techniques," 2015. [Online]. Available: 

https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:18724737. 

[12]  R. Sakai, C. Yongpeng , N. Kimura, “Anomalous Frame Detection 

by Grouping Frame Similarities between Two Videos Computed by 

Vision -Language Model to Extract Expert Workers' Unique 

Actions,” IEEE Access, under review, 2025. 

[13]  C. Jiang, K. Huang, S. He, X. Yang, W. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. 

Cheng, L. Yang, Q. Wang, F. Xu, T. Pan and W. Chu, "Learning 

Segment Similarity and Alignment in Large -Scale Content Based 

Video Retrieval," Proceedings of the 29th ACM International 

Conference on  Multimedia, 2021. 

[14]  G. Kordopatis -Zilos, G. Tolias, C. Tzelepis, I. Kompatsiaris, I. 

Patras and S. Papadopoulos, "Self -Supervised Video Similarity 

Learning," Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 

Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 2023. 

[15]  S. He, Y. He, M. Lu, C. Jiang, X. Yang, F. Qian, X. Zhang, L. Yang 

and J. Zhang, "TransVCL: Attention -enhanced Video Copy 

Localization Network with Flexible Supervision," 37th AAAI 

Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2023. 

[16]  Z. Han, X. He, M. Tang and Y. Lv, "Video Similarity and 

Alignment Learning on Partial Video Copy Detection," Proceedings 

of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2021. 

[17]  T. Nagarajan and L. Torresani, "Step Differences in Instructional 

Video," Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer 

Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024. 

[18]  T. Yunlong, B. Jing, X. Siting, S. Luchuan, L. Susan, W. Teng, Z. 

Daoan, A. Jie, L. Jingyang, Z. Rongyi, V. Ali, H. Chao, Z. Zeliang, 

L. Pinxin, F. Mingqian, Z. Feng, Z. Jianguo, L. Ping, L. Jiebo and 

X. Chenliang, "Video Understanding with Large Language  Models: 

A Survey," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video 

Technology, 2025. 

[19]  W. Mengmeng, X. Jiazheng and L. Yong, "ActionCLIP: A New 

Paradigm for Video Action Recognition," arXiv, 2021. 

[20]  C. Guo, Z. Yin -Dong, W. Jiahao, X. Jilan, H. Yifei, P. Junting, W. 

Yi, W. Yali, Q. Yu, L. Tong and W. Limin, "VideoLLM: Modeling 

Video Sequence with Large Language Models," arXiv, 2023. 

[21]  J. Burgess, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Rau, A. Lozano, L. Dunlap, T. 

Darrell , S. Yeung -Levy, “Video Action Differencing,” International 

Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. 

[22]  R. Padilla, A. F. da Silva, E. A. B. da Silva , S. L. Netto, “Change 

detection in moving -camera videos with limited samples using twin -

CNN features and learnable morphological operations,” Signal 

Processing: Image Communication, 2023. 

[23]  K. Cho, D. Y. Kim , E. Kim, “Zero -Shot Scene Change Detection,” 

AAAI, 2025. 

[24]  J. -W. Kim , U. -H. Kim, “Towards Generalizable Scene Change 

Detection,” Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition Conference, 2025. 

[25]  OpenCV team, "OpenCV," [Online]. Available: https://opencv.org/. 

[Accessed 10 9 2023]. 

[26]  Trimble Inc., "Trimble XR10 with HoloLens 2," 2022. [Online]. 

Available: https://fieldtech.trimble.com/en/products/mixed -

reality/trimble -xr10 -with -hololens -2. 

[27]  D. Ungureanu, F. Bogo, S. Galliani, P. Sama, X. Dua, C. Meekhof, 

J. Stühmer, T. J.Cashman, B. Tekin, J. L. Schönberger, P. Olszta , 

M. Pollefeys, “HoloLens 2 Research Mode as a Tool for Computer 

Vision Research,” arXiv, 2020. 

[28]  J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese and S. Hoi, "BLIP -2: bootstrapping 

language -image pre -training with frozen image encoders and large 

language models," Proceedings of the 40th International Conference 

on Machine Learning, 2023. 

[29]  W. Dai, J. Li, J. Li, D. Li, A. Tiong, A. M. H. Tiong, J. Zhao, W. 

Wang, B. Li, P. N. Fung , S. Hoi, “InstructBLIP: Towards General -

purpose Vision -Language Models with Instruction Tuning,” 

NeurIPS, 2023. 

[30]  Z. Chen, J. Wu, W. Wang, W. Su, G. Chen, S. Xing, M. Zhong, Q. 

Zhang, X. Zhu, L. Lu, B. Li, P. Luo, T. Lu, Y. Qiao , J. Dai, 

“InternVL: Scaling up Vision Foundation Models and Aligning for 

Generic Visual -Linguistic Tasks,” CVPR, 2024. 

[31]  H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li , Y. J. Lee, “Improved Baselines with Visual 

Instruction Tuning,” CVPR, 2024. 

[32]  Qwen Team, “Qwen3 -VL Technical Report,” arXiv, 2025. 

[33]  G. Rohit, E. -N. Alaaeldin, L. Zhuang, S. Mannat, A. Kalyan 

Vasudev, J. Armand and M. Ishan, "ImageBind: One Embedding 

Space To Bind Them All," Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF 

Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023. 

[34]  N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, "Sentence -BERT: Sentence 

Embeddings using Siamese BERT -Networks," Proceedings of the 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 

2019. 

RYO SAKAI  received Master of Information Science 

from Osaka University in 2016. He is currently a  senior 

researcher at  the  Robotics  Research Department  in  

> Research and Development Group ,Hitachi, Ltd

. His research 

interest s includes computer vision, machine learning, 

tacit knowledge extraction,  robotics, and intelligent 

system . He is a member of the  Robotics  Society of Japan. 

Kaname Yokoyama  received the bachelor’s degree 

from Toyota Technological Institute in 2025. He is a 

master’s student at the Graduate School of Engineering, 

Toyota Technological Institute, where he is a member 

of the Intelligent Information Media Laboratory. His 

research i nterests lie in computer vision and machine 

learning.